# Introduction
Economic activity is geographically extremely concentrated in cities, and even more in large cities. At present, competition between countries to a large part amounts to competition between their cities. This notion is starting to be embedded in, for instance, Dutch economic policy thinking.

Most countries have a city that is by far the biggest and most dominant city. For instance, London accounts for about 20% of the UK’s GDP and the next biggest city is much smaller. Indeed, it appears that the distribution of city sizes within a country often follows the Zipfian distribution, that is, the size of any city is inversely proportional to its ranking in the list of city ranked by size (Gaujal et al.; 2014). So, competition between countries often boils down to competition between their biggest cities.

How this Zipfian distribution emerges however has not yet been agreed on. There are many ideas on how cities form such a distribution, many of which rely on economic theories. There are of course other ways to approach this phenomenon. The Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) for example is interested to find out if decisions made at household level can explain the emergence of the Zipf’s law. They wish to understand more on the emergence of the Zipf’s law and how it may be influenced by future policy making or how it will influence future policies. This research has been conducted in order to bring light to these matters. Another interesting phenomenon concerning the Zipf’s law is that for some countries the Zipfian distribution does not hold strictly, i.e. with a power coefficient of one. The Netherlands is one of those countries, with many cities of more equal size than the Zipfian distribution would predict. The CPB wonders if that is a problem or an asset? What can be the reason for this? Their first approach is focused on decisions at household levels, which leads to the following research question posed in this report: 

*How do individual decisions at household level influence moving behaviour in cities to cause the emergence of the Zipf's law?*

In order to answer this question the method of Agent-Based Simulation has been proposed since it is especially made to study emergent behaviour over time and allows for decisions rules to be made at an agent’s level. The CPB is also interested to see what this method of research offers and how it might be of help to them in future research.

# Problem formulation 
Within the field of statistics a Zipfian distribution can be generated by several stochastic processes. Abby Ostriker (2014) did some research in this field, but the results didn’t provide answers to the questions above.
Two studies (Mansury and Gulyas, 2007, Gaujal et al., 2014) showed that a Zipfian distribution of cities can also be generated with an agent based model. An agent based model tries to explain complex macro patterns, like city size, on the basis of individual decision making. These individuals take account of their preferences and their perceived environment and they possess some heterogeneity in decision making. In comparison with traditional economic methods, the agent based modeling approach is more simulation oriented and less analytical.
Identifying causal mechanisms for city formation is important for policy issues. The studies of and Gulyas, 2007, Gaujal et al., 2014 are based on the forces of agglomeration and disagglomeration, both specified as a function of current city size. Individuals are attracted by large cities, which is a well know phenomenon in urban economic literature, but with growing city size the disadvantages of size increase gradually. Possibly this model can be extended with other relevant causal mechanisms.
